Add cmake overview draft (#51)
Simulation-Software-Engineering/Lecture-Material: building-and-packaging/material/cmake.md

# Make and CMake

> 60 mins in total

## Make

> 15 mins

### "Hello World" starting point

Show `hello-world.cpp` and build by hand `g++ -o HelloWorld main.cpp`

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  std::cout << "Hello World!" << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

### What is Make?

> - A build manager

Reviewer: I never heard this term before. I only know it as "build system"

> - The / a go-to solution for small projects (e.g., latex document, processing data, ...)

Reviewer: Not _only_ small projects though: https://github.com/torvalds/linux :wink:

    - Rules how to update out-of-date files
- When you run `make`, Make updates out-of-date files including transitive dependencies in right order.

### Single rule example

```makefile
HelloWorld : main.cpp
	g++ -o HelloWorld main.cpp
```

- Explain that `HelloWorld` depends on `main.cpp` and rule to update
- Three cases:
    - no `HelloWorld`: run update
    - `HelloWorld` older than `main.cpp`: run update
    - `HelloWorld` newer than `main.cpp`: do nothing

- Run make twice
- `ll` to show timestamp

- Requires actual tabs, spaces not allowed. Show error message.

> Makefile:2: *** missing separator (did you mean TAB instead of 8 spaces?).  Stop.

### Multiple rules example and phony targets

- Add `sse.hpp` and `sse.cpp` in subfolder `sse`

`sse.cpp`:

```cpp
#include "sse.hpp"
#include <iostream>

void sse()
{
  std::cout << "SSE is great!" << std::endl;
}
```

`sse.hpp`:

```cpp
#pragma once

void sse();
```

`main.cpp`:

```diff
#include <iostream>
+ #include "sse.hpp"

int main()
{
  std::cout << "Hello World!" << std::endl;
+ sse();
  return 0;
}
```

`Makefile`:

```makefile
sse.o : sse/sse.hpp sse/sse.cpp
	g++ -c sse/sse.cpp

> HelloWorld : main.cpp sse/sse.hpp

Author: good point. on both, right?

> HelloWorld : main.cpp sse/sse.hpp

Author: ```make
HelloWorld : main.cpp sse.o sse.hpp
	g++ -o HelloWorld sse.o main.cpp
```

> HelloWorld : main.cpp sse/sse.hpp

Reviewer 2: I think it should only depend on the object file. The object file itself depends on the header and so the object file should be updated if the header changes. At least I checked some of my older Makefiles where the main target depends only on object files. Although this is no guarantee that I am correct.

> HelloWorld : main.cpp sse/sse.hpp

Reviewer 2: Just as addition. File dependency tracking is complicated. In the Makefile I checked I do some magic with GCC flags (`MM`, `MMD` etc.) to generate dependency lists automatically. So could be that I miss some dependency tracking that is done automatically.

	g++ -o HelloWorld sse.o main.cpp sse.o
```

- Run `make`, only builds `sse.o`
- By default, first target is built
- `make HelloWorld` to build specific target
- phony target (doesn't correspond to file, no update rule)

```diff
+ all : HelloWorld sse.o
```

- Why does Make not just build directly build all targets? We could want to do different things with different targets.
- Add `clean` target, has no dependency

```diff
+ clean :
+ 	rm HelloWorld sse.o
```

- Run `make clean`
- `mkdir clean` and `make clean` confuses Make

```
+ .PHONY : all clean
```

### Advanced Make

- There is more:
    - Variables
    - Rules
    - Wildcards
- ... but becomes quickly very hard to read
- Not covered because cmake does this for us.
- But nicely documented in [py-RSE chapter 9](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/automate.html).

## CMake

*35 mins* ... might be tough

> ### Introduction

Reviewer 2: Do you want to mention KitWare as developer and the background of CMake's creation? I think it is connected to scientific software (ParaView).

What is cmake?

> A build system generator, for e.g. makefiles

Why not directly use makefiles?

> CMake can do many more things, is more flexible, avoids complex patterns, and is, thus, more readable

Are there alternatives?

> > Yes, `scons`, `autotools`, ...

Reviewer: meson,  build2 are growing in popularity too.

Reviewer 2: I think here one should be careful what we talk about and what one wants to compare. This kind of mixes two things:

- (Native) Build systems: (GNU) Make, meson, [ninja](https://ninja-build.org/), Visual Studio Files...
  - Software that actually compiles and links source code
- Build system generators: CMake, autotools,...
  - Software that creates files for some build system
  - CMake has generators for [many build systems](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/cmake-generators.7.html).

I do not know in what category Scons falls.

Will you explain and discuss the differences in detail?

> > No, but I claim that CMake is the most standard tool and sticking to standards has a value in itself. [Watch a video why](https://youtu.be/sBP17HQAQjk)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> No, but I claim that CMake is a standard tool in simulation science and sticking to standards has a value in itself. [Watch a video why](https://youtu.be/sBP17HQAQjk)
```
I think claiming that it is the **most** standard tool is a bit bold. There are so many [different systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_build_automation_software) and some big players develop and use their own systems. Google, for example, uses Blaze which has an open source spin-off in Bazel.

Can you give some reasons why CMake is great?

> Of course:

> - CMake can generate many build systems: make, ninja, VSCode project, Eclipse project, ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CMake can generate files for many build systems: make, ninja, VSCode project, Eclipse project, ...
```

> - Many GUIs and TUIs: ccmake, cmake-gui, integration in probably nearly all IDEs, ...

Reviewer 2: Are the GUIs and TUIs a good thing though? Do they make configuration more verbose or are they hiding things again? 

Makefiles often also have integration in IDEs.

> - CMake is *"cross-platform"*: you can ideally use same cmake file in all OS's (easy to distinguish platform-specific things)

Reviewer: Even android and object C  are supported

Maybe worth mentioning that CMake has a wide language support.

Reviewer 2: +1 for the language support. But then the question is still what do you compare it to? Makefiles also support a lot of languages. :wink:

> - Build directory becomes independent of source directory (build multiple versions with different dependencies etc.)

Reviewer: Or a debug build for testing and a profiler build without tests for profiling the changes.

Reviewer 2: Is this an advantage over Make?! Why would you not be able to do this with Make?

Author: This list is not at all intended as a comparison to Make.

> - CMake respects choices in user environment (e.g. user defines cpp compiler through CXX)

Reviewer 2: Make does this as well if you write your Makefile properly.

### CMake "Hello World"

Example adapted from [Yanson Tech](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wl2Srog-j7I)
Go back to original `main.cpp`

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION "3.12")

project("HelloWorld")

> add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" main.cpp)

Reviewer 2: Why does it make sense to use `"${PROJECT_NAME}"` here? Is this a best practice we want to promote? The [CMake tutorial](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/guide/tutorial/index.html) defines the the name of the executable independently of the project name.

I do not like the use of `"${PROJECT_NAME}"` for the executable. However, I understand that you want to show how to use variables. Maybe it is better do define an own variable here that can trigger something? Or use it later and add an option/own variable that builds everything either as static or dynamic library?!

Reviewer: IMHO it is best to keep things stupid simple.

```

> - CMake variable values: `${}`, use quotations to avoid problems with spaces

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CMake variable values: `${}`, use quotations marks `"` to avoid problems with spaces
```

> - `mkdir build && cd build && cmake ..` ... explain files (TODO), look at makefile

Reviewer 2: - Explain how to pass parameters and that one always has to prefix them with `-D`?
- Do you explain default [CMake variables and their values](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/cmake-variables.7.html) such as `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` and their consequences on the build?

Author: Yes, this come later (still TODO)

    - `CMakeCache.txt`

> - `make` and `./HelloWorld`

Reviewer 2: Are we able to do `make clean` afterwards, i.e., is the `clean` target defined automatically.

Author: yes, it is. i'll show it.

### Multiple files

- Add again `sse.cpp` and `sse.hpp` in subfolder `sse` and adapt `main.cpp`

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```diff
+ add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" main.cpp sse/sse.cpp)
- add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" main.cpp)
```

- Generate and build again, this time both with verbose output TODO

- What if there are multiple source files in `sse` folder?

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```diff
+ file(GLOB_RECURSE SRC_FILES CONFIGURE_DEPENDS main.cpp sse/*.cpp)
+ add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" "${SRC_FILES}")
- add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" main.cpp sse.cpp)
```

- `GLOB_RECURSE`: filenames with wildcard characters, recurse -> also subdirectories
- Actually discouraged since wildcard populated while generating. You need to run `cmake` again when you add a file. See [cmake docs](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/command/file.html#filesystem).

> - `CONFIGURE_DEPENDS` partial remedy, but costly and no guarantee that all build systems support this

Reviewer 2: So is there a proper way around it? Should one add source files by hand?

Author: A proper way around is to generate the list of source files outside of the main cmake file. At least, this is how it is done in preCICE.

### CTest

- Let's add some dummy tests

`main.cpp`:

```diff
+  if (argc > 1)
+  {
+    return 1;
+  }
```

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```diff
+ include(CTest)

> +

Reviewer: Either add `enable_testing()` or `option(BUILD_TESTING ON)`.
https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/command/enable_testing.html

+ add_test("test1" "${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/${PROJECT_NAME}")
+ add_test("test2" "${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/${PROJECT_NAME}" "someparam")
```

> - `include` includes a module, some module are builtin in CMake

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `include` includes a module, [some modules](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/cmake-modules.7.html) are builtin in CMake
```

- Creates target `test`
- `make test`, explain output
- We will learn later (after Christmas) how to work with proper packages for testing (e.g. boost)

> ### CPack

Reviewer 2: Is this the right location to introduce `CPack`? It feels a bit disconnected from the other parts. If we are short on time, the seems to be a natural candidate to be moved to the week afterwards.

Author: I see it on a similar level as CTest. But good point. Will jump over this if time is too short.

> - We can also package code with cmake (or better: steer from cmake)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We can also package code with CMake (or better: steer from CMake)
```

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```diff
include(CPack)

install(TARGETS "${PROJECT_NAME}" DESTINATION bin)
```

- Goes to `$CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX/bin`
- Run cmake and `make package`, creates `HelloWorld-0.1.1-Linux.tar.gz`

> - We will see later (next week) how to package a `.deb`

Reviewer: This will be difficult to get right.

Reviewer 2: In what way will this be difficult to get right? Could you explain this a bit more in detail?

Reviewer: CMake does not provide a complete solution to write Debian packages.
Creating correct packages is complex and requires a lot of additional work. (Try running `linitan` on the results. )
The CMake documentation is also be a bit cryptic on what exact information has to be provided. 
Maybe the time can be used more wisely on something else.

If correctness doesn't matter, then neither does my comment.

- Set version number

```diff
+ SET(CPACK_PACKAGE_VERSION_MAJOR "1")
+ SET(CPACK_PACKAGE_VERSION_MINOR "2")

> + SET(CPACK_PACKAGE_VERSION_PATCH "3")

Reviewer 2: Why does one have to do this manually? Will [CMake not derive these values](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/CPack.html#variable:CPACK_PACKAGE_VERSION_MAJOR) from CMake variables/properties like `CMAKE_PROJECT_VERSION_MAJOR` or `PROJECT_VERSION_MAJOR`? I am not sure what the real variable names are.

Author: Good point :+1:

include(CPack)
```

- Variables must be set before `include(CPack)`
- `make package` again

### Building libraries

- Let's turn the `sse` function into a library

```diff
+ file(GLOB_RECURSE SRC_FILES CONFIGURE_DEPENDS sse/*.cpp)
- file(GLOB_RECURSE SRC_FILES CONFIGURE_DEPENDS main.cpp sse/*.cpp)
+ add_library(sse "${SRC_FILES}")
- add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" "${SRC_FILES}")
```

- Build static lib `libHelloWorld.a`, that's the default
- Build shared lib by `cmake -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON ..`, don't change in `CMakeLists.txt`, but stick to standards
- Define cmake variables with `-D`, we will come back to this later
- Now, let's use the library

```diff
+ add_executable("${PROJECT_NAME}" main.cpp)
```

- ... gives an error, we also need to link

```diff
+ target_link_libraries("${PROJECT_NAME}" PUBLIC sse)
```

TODO: explain PRIVATE (only build), PUBLIC (both), INTERFACE (only linking)

### External Dependencies

> - preCICE should be used in every code :)

Reviewer 2: We are becoming a "Simulation Software Engineering and every example is preCICE" course :smile:

Author: As advertised :grin:

`main.cpp`:

```diff
+ #include "precice/SolverInterface.hpp"
...
+ sse();
+ std::cout << precice::getVersionInformation() << std::endl;
```

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```diff
find_package(precice REQUIRED CONFIG)

> target_link_libraries("${PROJECT_NAME}" PRIVATE precice::precice)

Reviewer: Maybe use a dummy name instead of `PROJECT_NAME`.
These lines already introduce a lot of other stuff.

```

- `find_package` works if dependency is "cmake-ready"

> - Alternative option if lib is in a discoverable location (standard system path or adjusted `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`)

Reviewer 2: Maybe you mean `LIBRARY_PATH`? I am not sure where CMake is searching in, maybe it searches in `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` as well, but `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` is used by the loader at runtime of your compiled library/executable. `LIBRARY_PATH` should be used by the linker during linking of the application.

```cmake
find_library(precice REQUIRED CONFIG)
target_link_libraries("${PROJECT_NAME}" PRIVATE precice)
```

- TODO: external dependencies via pkg-config?

>     - @fsimonis: Is `find_package` already using pkg-config? Or is there a real third option?

Reviewer: Some are, some aren't.

Normally they are written as follows:
* Try to find pkg-config (may not be available)
* Try to find the package using pkg-config
* Use the results as hints to find the library and include dirs.

>     - include(..), pkg-config.search_modules ... link ... cmake searches in pkg-config

Reviewer: ```cmake
find_package(PkgConfig REQUIRED)
pkg_check_modules(LIBXML2 REQUIRED IMPORTED_TARGET libxml-2.0)
target_link_libraries("${PROJECT_NAME}" PRIVATE PkgConfig::LIBXML2)
```

https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FindPkgConfig.html?highlight=pkg_config

### Options and variables

- For good software, a user should not need to touch `CMakeLists.txt`
- Use variables to talk to cmake
- Let's try to make preCICE an optional dependency of our code (not really everybody has preCICE installed, sadly)

`CMakeLists.txt`:

```cmake

> if (ENABLE_PRECICE)

Reviewer: To make this show up in CMake UIs:
```
option(ENABLE_PRECICE ON)
```

Also, you could make precice optional (which I personally don't like)

```cmake
find_library(precice CONFIG)

if (precice_FOUND)
message(STATUS "preCICE found!")
else()
message(STATUS "preCICE sadly not found :'(")
endif()
```

Reviewer 2: You do not like making preCICE optional because you like preCICE or is there a specific reason to this in the sense that it is bad practice or gives problems during the CMake build file generation process?

  message(STATUS "preCICE enabled")
  find_library(precice REQUIRED CONFIG)
  target_link_libraries("${PROJECT_NAME}" PRIVATE precice)
else()
  message(STATUS "preCICE disabled")
  target_compile_definitions("HelloWorld" PRIVATE NO_PRECICE)
endif()
```

`main.cpp`:

```c++

> #ifndef NO_PRECICE

Reviewer: I think you need to define a [compile definition](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/command/target_compile_definitions.html?highlight=definition#command:target_compile_definitions) for this to work

  std::cout << precice::getVersionInformation() << std::endl;
#endif
```

- Build without preCICE `cmake -DENABLE_PRECICE=OFF ..`
- Create different folder and build there with preCICE

TODO: variables, which ones are import? how to pass? change compiler etc

`CXX ?= g++`

TODO: More reading on this:

- https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FindPkgConfig.html#command:pkg_check_modules
- https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/cmake-variables.7.html
- https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/cmake-properties.7.html

### ccmake

`sudo apt-get install cmake-curses-gui`

- `ccmake ..`
- `c`, look add description of ENABLE_PRECICE`, disable it
- `t`, show all options, helpful to find out which variables exist
- `g`, generate `Makefile`

TODO: watch some tutorial, learn more

> ## Explain preCICE `CMakeLists.txt`

Reviewer: Instead, maybe introduce "limitations of CMake".

There are some issues as CMake aims to be the common denominator of build systems.
Example: Globs in CMake -> files in build system: Adding new file -> not respected by build system.

Reviewer 2: I would support such a section. (GNU) Make was treated so badly. No it is time for revenge. :smile: 

More seriously: It makes sense to mention the shortcomings/pitfalls when using CMake. It is not perfect and might give trouble in certain settings. The students should be made aware of such situations.

Author: I don't think I have the expertise right now to do such a section.
I am also not sure whether we really need this. In the end, our learning goal here is not that students can compare different build system and pick the best one for a certain project. The learning goal is that they understand how cmake roughly works since it used in many simulation codes.

> Example: Globs in CMake -> files in build system: Adding new file -> not respected by build system.

This one I already mention implicitly above

> 10 mins

- `sources.cmake` to include sources

## Exercise

TODO

> 90 mins

- Skeleton: main file, 2-3 other source files, each one with one dependency (e.g. Eigen (a bit difficult), deal.II, boost, mpi (?),..., boost-dev (header only) -> `boost_container_flat_set` example?)
- Other header are initially commented out in main file.
- Write docker file and build container, based on Ubuntu 20:04 (we only give high-level instructions this time)

> - Students write basic `CMakeLists.txt`.

Reviewer: Maybe compile a static or a dynamic library using `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS`.

- Add dependencies step by step. (in code, in `CMakeLists.txt`, in docker recipe (we provide package names)
- Make dependencies all optional
- Use CTest (we already provide test stubs)

> - Open PR with docker recipe, `CMakeLists.txt, and modified code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Open PR with docker recipe, `CMakeLists.txt`, and modified code
```

How many Docker recipes are the students supposed to create? Maybe they should set up their repository with the `CMakeLists.txt` while maintaining notes for the commands needed to compile their package first. Afterwards, they can create a Dockerfile based on these notes. 

What should the Dockerfile be good for in the end? Is it just about repetition?

Author: Two-fold: repetition and reproducibility (also for us when checking)

## Further material

- [Cmake Tutorial Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mKZ-i-UfGgQ)
- https://cliutils.gitlab.io/modern-cmake/

> - https://github.com/dev-cafe/cmake-cookbook

Reviewer: Official docs https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/index.html

More advances but best tutorial out there https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bsXLMQ6WgIk

Good up2date book https://crascit.com/professional-cmake/
